



Nation & World Digest: Pope speaks out on climate change
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 10, 2021 Sunday
FINAL EDITION


Copyright 2021 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 590 words
Byline:  Associated Press  
Body


POPE SPEAKS OUT ON CLIMATE CHANGE
VATICAN CITY - Pope Francis on Saturday called on lawmakers worldwide to overcome "the narrow confines" of partisan politics to quickly reach consensus on fighting climate change.
The pope addressed parliamentarians who were in Rome for a preparatory meeting before the U.N.'s annual climate conference, which begins in Glasgow, Scotland, on Oct. 31.
Francis referred to a joint appeal he and other religious leaders signed this week that calls for governments to commit to ambitious goals at the U.N. conference, which experts consider a critical opportunity to tackle the threat of global warming.
Francis said earlier he intended to participate in the U.N.'s upcoming COP26 conference, but the Vatican announced Friday that he would not attend.
NEW LAVA THREAT ARISES IN LA PALMA
LOS LLANOS DE ARIDANE, Canary Islands - A new river of lava belched Saturday from the La Palma volcano, spreading more destruction on the Atlantic Ocean island where over 1,000 buildings have already been engulfed or badly damaged by streams of molten rock.
The partial collapse of the volcanic cone overnight gave birth to a new lava stream that started to follow a similar path down the Cumbre Vieja ridge toward the western shore of the island to the ocean.
Authorities said the new lava flow is within the area that was hastily evacuated following the Sept. 19 eruption, when 6,000 residents were forced to flee their homes and farms.
A total of 1,186 buildings have been destroyed on La Palma and 1,228 acres have been covered with lava as of Saturday, according to the European Union's Copernicus Emergency Management Service.
BRIEFLY
ABORTION: Texas abortion clinics on Saturday canceled appointments they had booked during a 48-hour reprieve from the most restrictive abortion law in the U.S., which was back in effect as weary providers again turn their sights to the Supreme Court. The Biden administration has yet to say whether it will sue after a federal appeals court reinstated the law Friday.
ARCTIC: A pair of senators want to establish an assistant secretary of state for Arctic affairs to elevate Arctic issues in U.S. foreign policy. Sen. Lisa Murkowski, a Republican from Alaska, and Sen. Angus King, an independent from Maine, proposed the new post in a bill.
TALIBAN: A New York City man has been convicted on charges alleging that he tried to help the Taliban fight American forces. Delowar Mohammed Hossain, 36, was convicted late Friday in Manhattan federal court on charges that he tried to provide material support for terrorism and tried to contribute funds, goods and services to the Taliban in 2018.
SHOOTING: Authorities in Kentucky were investigating the fatal shooting of a man by a police officer early Saturday. The man died at a hospital after he was shot in Bell County. No one else was injured. No other details have been provided.
ELECTION: Prime Minister Andrej Babis' centrist party on Saturday narrowly lost the Czech Republic's parliamentary election, a surprise development that could mean the end of the populist billionaire's reign in power. The two-day election took place shortly after a report of Babis' overseas financial dealings in a project dubbed the "Pandora Papers" was released.
AUSTRIA: Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurz said Saturday that he will step down in a bid to defuse a government crisis triggered by prosecutors' announcement that he is a target of a corruption investigation. Kurz, 35, will become the head of his conservative Austrian People's Party's parliamentary group.

Load-Date: October 12, 2021


End of Document
Nation & World Digest: Pope speaks out on climate change



