Jan. 14-- Jan. 14--Tourist destinations the world over will have to contend with the effects of climate change. But experts suggest Williamsburg's tourism industry might be better positioned than others to survive higher temperatures and tides.

The vast majority of scientists agree that burning fossil fuels such as oil and coal has increased the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas, which means it blocks the sun's heat from escaping earth atmosphere, thereby warming it. That greenhouse effect, to which other human activity and gases also contribute, causes global temperatures to rise and sets the stage for cataclysmic changes to the environment.

Climate change doesn't affect all parts of the world in the same way at the same time. Locally, climate change looks like warmer temperatures and more humid weather, which means more precipitation. Climate change has already made its presence felt in the Williamsburg area as seen by the region's growing season, which is now a month longer than it was in the 1980s, said Chuck Bailey, a William & Mary weather and climate professor.

"Climate change is already impacting the Williamsburg area," Bailey said. "It will stay warmer longer."

The best-case scenario for global warming is a temperature increase of 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) by the end of the century. The worst case scenario is a 5-degree Celsius increase. Temperatures could increase by a degree Celsius in the next 20 years, Bailey said.

From the redoubts of Yorktown Battlefield and Colonial Williamsburg's Historic Area, to the roller coasters of Busch Gardens and the archaeological dig sites of Historic Jamestowne, tourists find themselves outdoors frequently. Hotter temperatures during the peak summer tourist season could factor into visitors' comfort as they explore the area.

But the region has been able to diversify its offerings and has worked to turn itself into a year-round destination, developments that suggest the region has some flexibility to deal with how, if at all, climate change affects visitors' habits, said Vicki Cimino, executive director the Tourism Council. The Tourism Council, an arm of the Greater Williamsburg Chamber and Tourism Alliance oversees efforts to market the region to tourists.

"The destination has multiple museums, brew pubs, indoor pools, retail locations, culinary offerings, and cultural experiences that are indoors for visitors," Cimino said in an email. "So, while Greater Williamsburg used to be seen as a 'summer destination,' it has evolved into a truly year-round destination with a mix of both indoor and outdoor activities."

Which is a good thing because two major local tourist draws, Colonial Williamsburg and Busch Gardens, apparently don't have a plan to address how climate change might affect their operations.

When asked for comment via email, a spokeswoman for Busch Gardens forwarded the inquiry to a SeaWorld Parks and Entertainment spokeswoman, who replied "we really don't have a (point of view) on this particular topic." Busch Gardens is among SeaWorld's national chain of theme parks.

A Colonial Williamsburg spokesman had a similar response, saying in an email "(I) don't have anything for you on this," in response to a request for comment on how Colonial Williamsburg planned to adapted to climate change.

Tourism in a warmer world

That apparent lack of preparedness isn't terribly uncommon in the global tourism industry. Where there are conversations about climate change and tourism, it's often at the highest levels of the industry like the United Nations' World Tourism Organization. And such conversations are typically focused on mitigation of the industry's role in creating carbon emissions rather than how to adapt to the changing climate, said Daniel Scott, a geography and environmental management professor at the University of Waterloo, Canada.

Communities that rely on the environment more readily for their tourism dollars, such as island nations reliant on coral reefs or mountain towns that bill themselves as ski destinations, are more proactive in working toward solutions. The Historic Triangle, with its greater emphasis on preserved historical sites, is in a pretty good place because it isn't overly reliant on its natural resources for tourism, Scott said.

Higher temperatures could make visitors more uncomfortable as they walk around recreated colonial streets in the summer, but thoughtful placement of cooling stations, tree cover and similar measures would help offset uncomfortable temperatures, Scott said.

In fact, rising temperatures could work somewhat in the Williamsburg area's favor.

The destination could become a refuge for visitors from nearby larger cities. That would be thanks to the urban heat island effect that is compounded by global warming. Urban areas can experience higher temperatures than surrounding rural areas because the preponderance of rooftops, pavement and other urban development attract and retain the heat of the sun more than vegetation and natural spaces do. The comparatively greener Williamsburg could come to be seen as an oasis to beat the heat of Richmond or D.C. for a few days, Scott said.

To some degree, a person's attachment to a tourism destination could offer some cushion from negative economic impacts of climate change, and also provide a segue into funding conservation efforts, according to research conducted by Erin Seekamp, a professor in North Carolina State University's department of parks, recreation and tourism management.

In surveys conducted as part of the study of the North Shore of Lake Superior in Michigan, Seekamp and her team found visitors with high attachment to the popular outdoor tourism destination would continue to visit the area despite whatever changes may come as a result of climate change.

High-attachment visitors were also found to be open to the idea of contributing money to adaptations that would save the destination, which Seekamp saw as a potential means to offset the high price of mitigation and adaptation some destinations will face.

Applied to the historical and cultural sites of the Williamsburg area, adaptation might be a difficult sell.

Part of the appeal of historical and cultural sites is that they are authentically preserved, and adaptation could require altering something that's been preserved for its historic value. Some tourism destinations will have to make hard decisions about what to save and how to save it, as well as what to chalk up as a loss, she said.

"We're not going to be able to conserve everything into perpetuity," she said.

On the question of sea-level rise, Williamsburg is in a better position than cities in south Hampton Roads like Norfolk thanks to a higher elevation. However, Jamestown Island is vulnerable to rising seas and land subsidence, which means decisions will have to be made about how to preserve the archeological site of the first permanent English settlement in North America, as well as what to do about the still-buried artifacts in low-lying spots that could be lost.

Jamestown Rediscovery is planning for as much as 3 feet of sea-level rise in as little as 50 years. An increase of that magnitude would put much of the island underwater, though the western portion of the island, where the museum facilities and fort dig sites are would fare better than the eastern part of the island, according to a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration map.

While the land loss has been uneven, a combination of land subsidence and sea level rise has caused the island to lose up to 200 feet of land since 1874. Global warming also creates more powerful hurricanes, which pose a third threat to the island.

"We're still seeing inundation on the island,"said David Givens, director of archeology at Jamestown Rediscovery. "We're continuing to monitor the encroaching water."